---
share: true
created: 2025-01-04
updated: 2025-01-04
---
#seed 

# American Civil War
The American Civil War lasted from 12 Apr 1861 – 9 Apr 1865. 

### "It wasn't about slavery, it was about states rights"

- [Mississippi's Declaration of Secession](https://avalon.law.yale.edu/19th_century/csa_missec.asp): "**Our position is thoroughly identified with the institution of slavery**-- the greatest material interest of the world. Its labor supplies the product which constitutes by far the largest and most important portions of commerce of the earth. These products are peculiar to the climate verging on the tropical regions, and by an imperious law of nature, none but the black race can bear exposure to the tropical sun. These products have become necessities of the world, and a blow at slavery is a blow at commerce and civilization. That blow has been long aimed at the institution, and was at the point of reaching its consummation. There was no choice left us but submission to the mandates of abolition, or a dissolution of the Union, whose principles had been subverted to work out our ruin."
- [Georgia's Declaration of Secession](https://avalon.law.yale.edu/19th_century/csa_geosec.asp): "The people of Georgia having dissolved their political connection with the Government of the United States of America, present to their confederates and the world the causes which have led to the separation. For the last ten years **we have had numerous and serious causes of complaint against our non-slave-holding confederate States with reference to the subject of African slavery**. They have endeavored to weaken our security, to disturb our domestic peace and tranquility, and persistently refused to comply with their express constitutional obligations to us in reference to that property, and by the use of their power in the Federal Government have striven to deprive us of an equal enjoyment of the common Territories of the Republic."
- [Texas' Declaration of Confederacy](https://avalon.law.yale.edu/19th_century/csa_texsec.asp): "Texas abandoned her separate national existence and consented to become one of the Confederated Union to promote her welfare, insure domestic tranquility and secure more substantially the blessings of peace and liberty to her people. She was received into the confederacy with her own constitution, under the guarantee of the federal constitution and the compact of annexation, that she should enjoy these blessings. **She was received as a commonwealth holding, maintaining and protecting the institution known as negro slavery-- the servitude of the African to the white race within her limits-- a relation that had existed from the first settlement of her wilderness by the white race, and which her people intended should exist in all future time**."
- [South Carolina's Declaration of Secession](https://avalon.law.yale.edu/19th_century/csa_texsec.asp): "The General Government, as the common agent, passed laws to carry into effect these stipulations of the States. For many years these laws were executed. But **an increasing hostility on the part of the non-slaveholding States to the institution of slavery**, has led to a disregard of their obligations, and the laws of the General Government have ceased to effect the objects of the Constitution."

> The constitution, it is true, secured every essential guarantee to the institution while it should last, and hence no argument can be justly urged against the constitutional guarantees thus secured, because of the common sentiment of the day. Those ideas, however, were fundamentally wrong. They rested upon the assumption of the equality of races. This was an error. It was a sandy foundation, and the government built upon it fell when the "storm came and the wind blew."
> 
> **Our new government is founded upon exactly the opposite idea; its foundations are laid, its corner-stone rests, upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man; that slavery subordination to the superior race is his natural and normal condition**. This, our new government, is the first, in the history of the world, based upon this great physical, philosophical, and moral truth. This truth has been slow in the process of its development, like all other truths in the various departments of science. It has been so even amongst us. Many who hear me, perhaps, can recollect well, that this truth was not generally admitted, even within their day. The errors of the past generation still clung to many as late as twenty years ago. Those at the North, who still cling to these errors, with a zeal above knowledge, we justly denominate fanatics. All fanaticism springs from an aberration of the mind from a defect in reasoning. It is a species of insanity. One of the most striking characteristics of insanity, in many instances, is forming correct conclusions from fancied or erroneous premises; so with the anti-slavery fanatics.
> 
> [Vice President of the Confederacy Alexander H. Stephens's speech in Savannah, March 21, 1861](https://history.iowa.gov/history/education/educator-resources/primary-source-sets/civil-war/cornerstone-speech-alexander)